# River-plastic-monitoring-tool
A Google Colab pipeline to be able to classify seasonal dynamics of plastics using Water Hyacinth as a proxy using Sentinel-2 imagery

While increasingly more is known about plastic waste accumulation in the marine environment, data on the distribution and quantification of riverine sources, required for development of effective mitigation measures, remain limited. Earlier research has shown that floating plastics accumulate in water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes) patches. It has been hypothesized that water hyacinths play an important role on the seasonal dynamics of riverine macroplastic transport and distribution. This provides new opportunities, as hyacinths may be detected and monitored using open source remote sensing products. These open source remote sensing products can be applied on areas where water hyacinths occur  and plastic emissions are estimated to be high. Our goal is to develop a first method to detect and monitor water hyacinths using spaceborne remote sensing. Additionally, use empirical relations to estimate the plastic concentration in hyacinths. Water Hyacinth patches on the river surface of the Saigon River in Vietnam were detected using a novel Floating Algae Index (FAI) developed for the Sentinel-2 Multi-Spectral Instrument (MSI). Building first steps toward a future monitoring system, we leveraged spectral shape to identify macroplastics, and a Naive Bayes algorithm to classify mixed materials. Suspected Water Hyacinth were successfully classified as Water Hyacinth with an accuracy of 93 percent. After successfully detecting seasonal dynamics of classified Water Hyacinth pixels for 2018 we used two methods to extract the amount of plastic within these classified Water Hyacinth pixels. The first one consists of leveraging spectral shapes  of both floating plastic and Water Hyacinth to detect ratios on sub-pixel scales. The second one consists of multiplying In-situ measurements of the  mean plastic density in water hyacinths with the amount of classified Water Hyacinth. With these results, for the first time we are able to map seasonal dynamics for both Water Hyacinth as well as floating plastics. Our study provides the first step in exploring the possibilities of riverine macroplastic monitoring using water hyacinths as a proxy. 
